TITLE: The Doors of Beirut
ADVISOR: Michael Jemtrud

From the rubble of the Civil War to the marble of the reconstruction, one thing remains unchanged: the emptiness.

Today, the Beirut Central District echoes the silence of the former “no man’s land”. Behind the facade of luxury storefronts lies a lifeless void, a city center cut off from its people, stripped of its soul, and denied of its purpose as a democratic space for all.
The “civil” war remains a hot topic, despite having ended 35 years ago. Lebanon still struggles with the same unresolved tensions and identity clashes. The two poles forged during that time, East and West, never returned to the historical middle ground, in the Beirut Central District. Politics, economy, and most notably war, played their part. However, this project confronts the Design failure on every scale.
 
The district is a victim of “modernist optimization”, an imported logic that engineered segregation and car-centric hostility. It sterilized the city through the construction of a massive highway ring choking the BCD, leaving the former social space dead.
 
How can the Architecture of re-reconstruction of the Beirut Central District be the start of a civic and social renewal, breaking the bipolar reality that defines the country?
 
Three contexts from distinct conditions are taken as precedents: Sarajevo between 1993 and 1997, Berlin between 2004 and 2012, and the Swiss postmodern context between 2009 and 2011.

Three extracted principles from the different analysis are as follows: Use of the existing as a foundation of the future, Quality densification: Community driven quotidian design, Resilient urban architecture.
The identified three principles are not necessarily the only intentions to consider but draw guidelines for what one should be careful implementing after passing through the Beiruti filter.

After 20 years of frequenting the space and 8 boots-on-the-ground analyses of the BCD, 70 empty plots, open-air parking lots, and abandoned buildings, within the district or on its borders, were identified as significant opportunities for activation.From 70 potentials, 23 selected intervention points create clusters of plots along the edge of the BCD.

Each cluster opens toward one of the seven main outskirts surrounding the Beirut Central District and follows a dual strategy of “dynamic” and “static” interventions, taking advantage of the existing massive pedestrian flow on the borders of the BCD.

This effectively offers access to the site through urban recomposing by bypassing the “ring” highway as a first step, to then offer motives of entry and use proper to every outskirt and “door”.
This strategy seeks to Reintroduce the seven historic doors of Beirut into the contemporary Lebanese urban context.
A form of urban acupuncture.
 
The “Doors” function as temporary destinations, intended to be surpassed by the socio-urban momentum they catalyze.

By introducing the public to new spatial potentials, this approach seeks to spark a cohesive identity within the Lebanese diversity and foster communal life in a familiar, existing middle ground.