TITLE: Sightseers & Sitemakers: The Architecture of Tourism in Băile Herculane
ADVISOR: David Theodore

The research considers tourism as a catalyst for cultural continuity, spatial storytelling, and rural revitalization in the context of abandoned locations in Romania. Between 1990 and 2019, although tourism infrastructure in Romania increased by approximately 161.5%, domestic and international tourism grew by only 8.77%. This imbalance raises questions about how changes in architectural strategies could better support meaningful tourism development and strengthen the relationship between feelings of national pride and belonging. The thesis proposes that architecture designed for tourism can help prevent abandoned heritage sites from becoming lost to the past by acting as a catalyst for economic growth and urban and cultural revitalization in a community. The research focuses on Băile Herculane, a small historic spa town in southern Romania situated within a narrow valley along the Cerna River. The site has been associated with thermal bathing for nearly two millennia, beginning with Roman bath complexes constructed around natural hot springs. At the heart of the town lies the Neptune Imperial Baths, a large bath complex that once served as the center of the town’s thermal tourism economy. In this proposal, the complex is treated as a symbolic central reference point within this network. Today, following decades of neglect and deterioration, abandoned parts of the town are currently the focus of restoration initiatives led by architects, volunteers, and heritage advocates. The project aims to spark economic growth through tourism-boosting initiatives led by a network of architectural interventions carefully curated across the site to create a place where visitors can thrive. The strategy identifies key nodes within the master plan of the town and proposes new infrastructure and pavilions intended to form physical connections across different parts of the site while emphasizing the connection to the river and the bath complex. The program addresses the need for spaces for gathering, viewing, sharing culture, and celebrating heritage. By creating architecture that not only welcomes new visitors, but supports Romanian traditions, and allows for informal encounters, the interventions aim to reanimate the town by encouraging contact between visitors, locals, and the surrounding natural landscape. In this sense, architecture here is explored as a medium for sustaining heritage and a tool for reimagining tourism as a regenerative force that supports cultural identity and long-term local development.