TITLE: Rethinking Montreal's Metro Stations: A Pragmatic Manifesto
ADVISOR: David Covo

Subway systems, sky trains, and highways fall into a special category of constructions: transportation infrastructure. While this typology is more often associated with engineering and urban planning than architecture, it seems evident that underground tunnels and overpasses can have a strong architectural identity. Indeed, several metro systems worldwide have achieved an imageability that is now indissociable from the city where they exist: Moscow can boast about its underground palaces, and Washington takes pride in its iconic coffered ceilings.

In Montreal, the metro designed in the 1960s has provided the city with a piece of infrastructure endowed with a strong architectural character. To this day, Montreal's metro is still a celebrated icon of design worldwide. Each station is an architectural experiment conceived by a different architect who employed spatial layouts, materials, patterns, and colors that were his own.

Notwithstanding the evident aesthetic qualities of the Montreal metro, there were also several missed opportunities. One of the most evident is the absence of dense housing projects integrated above the stations themselves. At the time when the original metro system was being designed and built, the yet-to-be-developed real estate projects above each station were left as a subsequent design task, resulting in a lack of coordination between the station and the future program located above it. Today, the difficulty of adding structural loads above metro edicules makes it almost impossible for developers to build on top of metro exits. Since then, urban planning has evolved towards Transit-Oriented Development, which advocates for urban density placed directly above transit nodes.

Another missed opportunity for the Montreal metro was its reduction to a network of pedestrian circulation. A subway system can be much more than a series of corridors and platforms. It should be a lively urban place in the full sense of the term, with a life of its own. A station can be at the same time an amphitheatre, a public market, or perhaps a hockey rink!

The projected expansion of the Montreal Metro Blue Line offers a rare opportunity for architects to rethink the metro's urban and poetic presence in the city. We should take advantage of this major undertaking to integrate dense housing projects (TOD) and civic spaces within the new stations. This thesis project attempts to show how the architect may bring a cohesive vision of urban life into the development of a new transit node. The blue line expansion can become a starting point to better weave our city.