TITLE: A Memorial to the Dispossessed of Powell Street
ADVISOR: David Covo

Vancouver was once home to a large and thriving community of Japanese Canadians, the vast majority of whom lived in a neighborhood centered on Powell Street known as Paueru Gai. Here, they established a self-sustaining community comprising hundreds of organizations and thousands of businesses. However, Paueru Gai ceased to exist in 1942 when all 22,000 Japanese Canadians were forcefully interned and had all their belongings and homes dispossessed, essentially ensuring they would never return.

Eighty years later, much has changed in Powell Street and in the national Japanese Canadian Community. Powell Street is now a part of the larger Downtown Eastside (DTES) neighborhood, an extremely diverse haven for radical self-expression, community support, and low-income housing, which stands in juxtaposition to the gleaming glass condos of Vancouver. Unfortunately, the DTES is at the center of the city’s opioid and homelessness crises, meaning the neighborhood lives in a constant state of precarity. Despite this, countless local leaders have founded support programs and organizations to assist those in need, creating one of the tightest communities in all of Vancouver. With this community in the background, Japanese Canadians, now dispersed across Canada, return every year to celebrate their history at the Powell Street Festival, the longest-running cultural festival in Canada. Thus, the DTES has two faces: one of local support in the face of precarity and one of pilgrimage for those who were forcefully driven away.

It is with this in mind that I propose a series of interventions within Powell Street to cater to both residents and returning Japanese Canadians. As one walks along Powell Street, they will encounter a series of memorials and structures that create a cohesive streetscape to stand in opposition to the traditional aesthetics of Vancouver. First, one will arrive upon a small memorial commemorating the Internment of Japanese Canadians. Continuing onwards, one will pass a small apartment building for transitional housing. Eventually, one will reach a large interpretive and community center incorporated with a memorial to all those who have faced injustice and dispossession throughout Powell Street’s history. This structure will connect to an adjacent park, a historic rallying point for protests and community activism. Finally, one will arrive upon a large apartment building dedicated to off-market housing and a women’s homeless shelter. Connecting all these sites will be a unified architectural language and a series of sidewalk markers honouring those who were forcefully removed from Powell Street.